# defensive-pass-coverage-variability-success-NFL
Date Assigned: November 6, 2025
Date Submitted: December 14, 2025

This project was completed for SPAX402: Predictive Analysis with Athletics Data, a Sports Analytics (SPAX) course taught at the University of Delaware. The professor for this course, Professor Jack Davis, is currently the Associate Athletic Director of Business Intelligence, Analytics, and Strategy at the University of Delaware Athletic Department. A key objective of this course is to prepare students for a career in professional or collegiate athletics.

For my final project, I wanted to look at how variation in defensive pass coverage scheme usage (Cover 0, Cover 1, Cover 2, etc.) affected the performance of a team's pass defense. I have heard about several success stories from defenses that consistently mix up the defensive looks that they show to the opposing offense. I wanted to investigate the truth behind this idea, particularly in the context of pass defense and defensive pass coverage strategies.

To calculate the defensive pass coverage variability for each team, I used a statistic called standardized entropy. This statistic, described more in the presentation and final report within this repository, uses the frequency of each defensive pass coverage scheme to express the true defensive pass coverage variation of each NFL team in 2025. The ten defensive pass coverage schemes considered come from Pro Football Focus (PFF), and they are described more in detail in both the report and the presentation.

In order to determine the effect of defensive pass coverage variability on a team's pass defense outcomes, I created both a simple linear regression and a multiple linear regression. The dependent variable for both models, opponent EPA per pass, was deemed an effective efficiency statistic because it adjusts for the number of passes that the defense faces. For the multiple linear regression, three control variables were added using PFF grades from the previous two NFL seasons. Average cornerback coverage grade, average safety coverage grade, and average pass rusher grade were added to the model in order to isolate the estimated effect of defensive pass coverage variability on opponent EPA per pass.

The data for this project, including both the raw and transformed data, can be found in the 'data' folder of this repository. The code for the statistical regressions, performed using R programming, can be found in the 'scripts' folder. For this assignment, Tableau was used to create the required data visualizations. These visuals can be found in the presentation, final report, and the 'Tableau' folder within this report. The slideshow for the oral presentation that I gave in class can be found in both .pdf and .pptx forms within the 'presentation' folder. Finally, the written report can be found in both .docx and .pdf forms within the 'report' folder.

Professor Davis' University of Delaware Athletic Department page: https://bluehens.com/staff-directory/jack-davis/1624